 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POLICY  
 
 
HUMAN RESOURCES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
April  2019  
2  Title  
Human Resources Policy  
and other  Guidelines  and codes  for members of  staff 
 
Index  
Foreword  
Purpose of the  Policy  
Reading guide  
First part : Human Resources Guidelines  
1.  Human Resources Policy and general Procedures   
2. Transparent handling of complaints   
3. Selection process and start of collaboration   
 
Second  part: External Codes  to which  Cesvi adheres  
1. Core Humanitarian Standard  
2. Red Cross and Red Crescent and Standard Sphere Codes of Conduct  
Appendix : supervision and monitoring methods . 
 
 
Attachment  A: Recruitment  and Selection Procedures  
 
 
FOREWORD  
Cesvi is a non -governmental non -profit  Organization , which is non-denominational  and independent , 
and provides aid and development  assistance  all over the world . 
Our members of  staff play a fundamental role in the fight against poverty and hunger . Their skills and 
commit ment are vital to our  success .  
Cesvi’s  aim is to set common standards in the management  of its Human Resources , in order to develop 
skill sets and a shared mentality, promoting the collaboration and participation,  leadership, 
responsibility  and growth of its  staff.  
Cesvi has developed these Policies to set down principles and guidelines to which all employees must 
adhere, which are binding and  perfectly  in line with the vision and mission of our Organization.   
 
 
Mission  
Cesvi opera tes all over the world  to support the  most vulnerable populations in  promoting human 
rights, and helping them achieve their ambitions , for sustainable development.   
 
Through  its ideals of social justice and respect of human rights,  Cesvi pursues the well-being of 
vulnerable populations who  are living  in conditions of poverty or have been affected by war, natural 
calamities  and environmental disasters . This is achieved,  also at an international level, by carrying out 
works of humanitarian aid, in the c ontext of both emergency situations and in terms of development in 
supporting the weakest categories , in particular children, women, the elderly and marginalized people, 
support ing them in achieving  their aims  with the objective of promoting self-sufficien cy and 
sustainability  in the future . 
 
  3   
Vision  
Cesvi believes that the recognition of human rights contributes to the well -being of everyone on the 
planet, which is a shared home to be safeguarded . 
 
Humanitarian and co -operative activity is conducted by people for people. The only truly indispensable 
resource, which is provided by NGOs, is a human one, which needs to be prepared, capable, ready to 
operate even in hostile and dangerous contexts.   
 
 
PURPOSE  of the  POLICY  
 
This Policy aims to provide  Cesvi with a useful guide which  is standardized and equitable for 
management of the personnel working for the Organization . 
Cesvi’s g oal is to define working conditions that are recognized as impartial and  that encourage staff to 
demonstrate a sincere sense of interest and pride in the Organization and its work program, and to use 
their best skill sets to fulfil the role assigned to them . 
 
READING GUIDE  
This publication consists of two parts. The first part, drafted  by Cesvi , contains the main  guidelines 
regarding  the Human Resources ( HR) policies  and management .  
The document s assembled  in the first part are the result of a process of analysis and proposals regarding  
human resources management methods pertinent to Cesvi since  2004, the year in which the construction 
of a HR Policy began .  
The various different activities concerning the management of hum an resources have been analyzed  in 
order  to identify  critical points, improvements and areas of excellence within the human resources 
methods of management,  formalized as operating standards for the Organization . 
The General Human Resources (HR) Policy and Procedure  document  is the main result  of this proce ss, 
which ha s been  directly inspired by the standards of the CHS Alliance  (Core Humanitarian Standard on 
Quality and Accountability ) – formerly  People in Aid , drawing  on its fundamental principles, defining 
the various operational objectives adapted to Cesvi, accompanied by certain performance indicators and 
by the description of specific actions and tools , managers and reporting methods1. 
 
In support of these g eneral HR Guidelines, other support tools have also been developed during the 
same process for an effective/efficient, transparent and fair human resources management.  Some have 
been outlined in this publication, and of interest  to who care about for rais ing management quality 
standards within co -operative organization s developing humanitarian aid.  
All the documents assembled in the first part have been in the DNA of the Organization for many years . 
They are, therefore , periodically revised and updated alongside all the other tools  that are not available 
for public view here due to their overly technical nature . 
Cesvi is committed to the continuous improvement and regular updating of the organization’s human 
resource mana gement methods .  
 
The second  part, on the other hand,  covers the external codes to which Cesvi ha s chosen to adhere . 
In this case, these are  well-known guiding principles and ethical standards , which are summarized and 
published here for the benefit of all  those who  hold roles and enter into a working relationship with 
Cesvi, whether as partner s, operator s, volunteer s, donor s, or recipient s of the  cooperation for 
development , education and humanitarian aid promoted by  the NGO worldwide, wherever it is neede d. 
                                                 
1 These last two aspects are not covered in this document, not only so as not to make the reading of the publication 
unwieldy, but also due to their prevalently operational -technical and non -political quality  and their general purpose.  4  First Part : Human Resources Guidelines . 
 
1. Human Resources Policy and  General Procedures  
 
Introduction to the HR Policy and General Procedures  
Cesvi considers its members of staff to be its most important asset . The attitude taken by the personnel 
working for Cesvi is fundamental to the company achieving its mission . The people who work for Cesvi 
are respected and valued, and appropriate ly received . The effectiveness and success of development 
initiatives and humanitarian aid are dependent on the contribution of every staff member – regardless of 
whether they are an employee, a collaborator, an intern or a volunteer.   
For this reason, Cesvi has been working for years to ensure that its Policies and procedures enable the 
full application of international standards of efficiency and transparency in the management of its 
human resources. This commitment resulted in adhering to  People in Aid in 2004 – and subsequent 
certification  in 2008 – and to adherin g to CHS standards from  20152.  
The primary objective is always that of guaranteeing that the communities and people affected by crisis 
or in situations of need receive the assistance they need  from competent  and adequately managed  
employees and volunteers .  
 
The policies  and practice s in the management of human resources summarized in the following 
principles  form a single set of guidelines that organically protect and promote human resources as an 
integral and fundamental part of Cesvi ’s Mission.   
 
 
The Human Resources P olicy and  general procedures  applies to all Cesvi staff members as detailed and 
set out below.   
--- 
 
  
Principle  One: Human Resource s Strategy   
Statement: Human resources are a n integral part of our operational  and strategic plans . 
Our human resources strategy , whether applied to expatriates or local staff, is at the core of our 
organizational strategy ; it is long term and encompasses  all the different components of the 
organization . Our policies guarantee the effective ness of our  actions , the quality of life in the 
workplace and high ethical standards. The well -being of our staff, understood  as a condition for 
professional and personal satisfaction, is an integral part of our human resources strategy.  
 
 
 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES   
 
1.  
Cesvi has adopted  a long-term  HR strategy   
 
Indicators  
 There is a  long-term strategic analysis and proposal document.  
                                                 
2 Cesvi has been a mem ber of CHS Alliance since 2015 and is working to achieve full application of CHS standards.  
 5  Implementation procedures  and tools  
The document is drawn up  at least every 4/5 years by the Head of the Human Resources 
Department,  the Chief Operations Officer and the Chief Executive Officer .  
 
 
2 
The annual  planning  and the A nnual Report explicitly recognize the contribution made by the 
staff in achi eving the objectives of the NGO  
 
Indicators  
 There is an annual HR report.  
 There is  a chapter devoted to HR in the annual report  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
By 31st March  every year, the HR officer  drafts  an Annual HR Report for the COO , a summary of 
which will be  included in the Annual Report.    
General contents  of the HR Annual Report : 
- updates of the HR long-term strategy adopted by Cesvi  
- forecast and analysis of available resources to implement the aforementioned strategy   
- updates  in HR management policies and practices   
- update of selection processes   
- report on  previously carried out and planned training activities  
 
3. Cesvi recognizes the importance of strategic planning of human resources in order to achieve  
the expected results in  an effective and qualitative manner  
 
 Indicators :  
 
 There is an annual turnover  analysis .  
 During the preparation of the head office human resources’ budget, a careful analysis of 
personnel needs for the following year is carried out .   
 Ongoing updates exist  between the HR Department and the Programs Department regarding the 
evolutio n of human resources’ requirements necessary for implementing projects .    
 In each foreign office , the plans for personnel requirements are presented annually, with periodic 
updates.  
 
Implementation procedures and tools : 
By 31st December  every year, the HR Contact person calculates staff turnover and provides this 
information to the COO.  
 
Subject to discussion  with and approval by the Chief Executive Officer, the Department Heads  provide 
the HR manager with the plans relating to the ir professional  needs for the following year, indicating the 
professional profiles required.   
 
At the same time as a new project proposal is sent, the desk office r will inform the HR officer  of any 
requirements for additional human resources . The HR function is then activated and will run a check 
against the existing personnel availa ble and, as  necessary, will prepare a recruitment plan for the 
approved project.  
 
 6  Principle  Two : Staff  policies and  practi ces 
Statement: Our human resources policies aim to be effective, coherent, fair, non -
discriminatory and transparent . 
Our policies guarantee effective actions, a good  quality of life in the workplace  and strong ethical 
standards ; they go above and beyond simple compliance with the minimum legal and working 
requirements and meet the expectations of both donors and beneficiaries. International labor 
protection standards are both recognized and accepted.  
 
 
 
 
SPECIFIC  OBJECTIVES  
 
1. 
All HR policies and practices are known . 
 
Indicators  
 Collaborative practices are stated in writing . 
 All members of staff are aware of the policies that concern them . 
 Remuneration  and benefit s, in addition to reflecting the specific policies introduced within the  
Organization  (eg. Remuneration policies) , are defined according  merit and objective criteria.  
 A Cesvi staff Code of conduct exists, and a copy is given to each member of staff . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
All documents relating to the human resources policies are handed to the member of staff at the 
start of the collaboration and specific training is given on this subject . 
Every individual has the right to obtain a written contract before the collaboration commences, 
whether this takes place in Italy or Abroad, and whether it refers to expatriate or local staff,  
employee s, casual labor or volunteer s.  
 
Every  local office may prepare its own specific rules of conduct that are appropriate to the local 
context and in line with the principles, contents and specific objectives of this document.  
Local regu lations must be shared with the head office representatives.  
 
The presentatio n of the Staff  Code of conduct is an int egral part of general training.  
 
Salary levels are defined by the NGOs’ National Framework Agreement (for collaborators ), by the  
CCNL  of reference  (for employees) and in general  by the  Cesvi  salary grids . The calculation 
methods are defined using the specific Cesvi salary structure tables. Any exception to these 
procedures must be authorized by the Department Heads (for collaborators ), and the CEO  (for 
employees ). 
 
Each foreign office prepares salary structures that are in line with local legislation  and practices , 
established using  a benchmark and with other NGOs in their Country . 
  7  2. 
The p olicies and practices are periodically reviewed in order to take into account legislative 
changes and make improvements that might  increase their effectiven ess, fairness and 
transparency . 
 
Indicators  
 The most relevant updates are communicated to the staff members in writing.   
 Human Resources policies and practices are periodically reviewed . 
 The applicable national labor laws are known and respected.  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
The most relevant updates are communicated to the staff members.   
This document and the following related documents : Staff  Code of conduct ; Selection and start of 
collaboration  policy , Transparent handling of complaints, grievances and disagreements , are 
subject to periodic review and verification at least every five years. T he Manager of the a udit is the 
Head of the HR Department.  
 
 
Principle  Three : Staff  management  
Statement: Effective support, management and staff develo pment is fundamental 
for the effectiveness of the Organization  as a whole . 
Cesvi  staff members , whatever type of contract  they have  with the Organization , have the right to 
be properly prepared to conduct  their job effectively , so that Cesvi can achieve  its own Mission. 
The m anagement policies, procedures and training offered by the Organization  enab le managers to 
prepare and support their staff in efficiently carrying out  their activities  efficiently , developing 
their potential and encouraging and recognizing good performance , which will subsequently be 
evaluated in terms  of responsibility and merit.  
 
 
 
 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES  
 
1. 
The managers are given all the necessary training, compatible with available resources, to be able 
to fulfil their responsibilities.  
 
Indicators  
 At the HQ: training sessions are regularly  offered, aimed  at enhancing  managerial skills.  
 In the  field: special training sessions can be scheduled, taking into account logistical difficulties 
and costs.  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
Annual training courses. Ad hoc training sessions . 
Further training according to  specific needs may also be organized in the field, if deficiencies are 
identified once the collaboration has started . 
 
  8  2.  
All personnel are clearly informed of the professional objectives and performance standards 
required ; every member of  staff knows who to refer to and what management support they can 
depend upon .  
 
Indicators  
 Staff members are  aware of the ir mandate and the values of the organization, and work  
coherently with them ;  
 Labor  contracts clearly indicate the collaborator’s position, from b oth a legal and an 
organizational standpoint ; 
 Labor contracts clearly indicate the contact person(s) for each operator.  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
All responsibilities , Contact persons3, professional objectives , and any operational and 
representative delegations are clearly stated  in the work contract and Job Description (JD). Labor  
contracts clearly indicate the contact person(s) for each operator . 
 
3. 
All personnel are aware of the relevant Policies and procedure s for executing their duties, and of 
the disciplinary procedures applicable in the event of these rules being violated, as well as the 
practices  for reporting complaints or grievances . 
 
Indicators  
 The staff receives appropriate information concern ing the relevant Policies and procedures for 
carrying out their duties, including the Code of Conduct ;  
 The procedure for the Transparent  handling of complaints  is given to the staff member at the 
time of the collaboration agreement being stipulated.  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
Every member of staff is duty bound to carry out their duties within the legal, mandate and values 
limit s of the Organization , about which they should  receive appropriate  information , and therefore 
accept the consequences of violating them.  
Cesvi gives everyone the possibility of expressing their own opinion or reporting complaints or 
grievances, namely : 
- with regards to his/her working relationship with Cesvi: the issue is defined  according to  
national agreements (NGO /CCNL  Syndicate Framework Agreement ) – when applicable - 
and according to the current policy in the Transparent  handling of complaints section ; 
- regarding  the alleged violation of the  Policies, Codes  or alleged illegal, irregular or ethically 
incorrect conduct as established internally by the organization, via the  Whistleblowing 
Policy applicable to the HR department, and also to donors, project recipients and other 
interested parties in contact with the NGO.  
  
                                                 
3The name of the contact person to whom the staff member must refer during the course of the collaboration  is indicated in 
the work contract or JD.  9  4. 
Every m ember of  staff knows that his/her work and behavior is subject to periodic evaluation . 
 
Indicators  
 A periodic performance evaluation mechanism  exists which is based on criteria of responsibility 
and merit.  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
In addition to a general understanding  of one’s role and the organization’s modus operandi , each 
individual collaborator and his/her managers agree on the personal objectives and expected 
performance on the basis of which his/her work will be evaluated . In assessing performance, the 
managers exclusively follow the evaluation criteria adopted by the Organization . 
 
Principle  Four : Consultation and  communication  
Statement: Dialogue with staff about issues that may affect their work enhances  the 
quality and  effectiveness of the organization’s policies and practices. This kind of 
dialogue is strongly encouraged . 
We recognize that the effective development, implementation and monitoring of policies and 
practices in human resources rely on appropriate consultat ion and communication with the people 
who work with us . We aim to include all members of staff in these processes, whether they be 
employees, collaborators, inte rns, expatriate or local staff.  
 
 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES  
 
1. 
Personnel are notified and appropriately  consulted  every  time policies or practices concerning 
human resources and directly regarding them are developed or revised.  
 
Indicators  
 Time is allocated and tools exist for communication between and with staff regarding HR issues.   
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
The NGO National Framework Agreement  - Syndicates  for staff with a semi -subordinate  
contract , as well as the  CCNL  applied to employees , provides for specific consultation  times when 
the Staff can freely organize meetings .  
 
2. 
Communication between similar staff groups (horizontal communication) and between staff with 
different degrees of responsibility  is encouraged . 
 
Indicators  
 Specific occasions for communication between groups of workers and between staff and 
managers  are provided . 
 Personal debriefing time at the end of any collaboration is guaranteed.  
 Interviews with a member of the HR department is offered regarding job opportunities, and with 
a consultant psychologist upon request.  
 Every foreign office (field office) offers open opportunities to the staff for exchanging and 
sharing information . The methods and criteria are defined according to requirement . 10  Implementation procedures and tools  
Opportunities  for the staff to exchange and share information are provided in every Department, 
foreign office and field office.  Participation procedures and criteria are defined on a case by case 
basis, as required.  
Every member of staff ha s the right and duty to be debriefed  at the end of the assignment with the 
person to whom he/she answers directly, as indicated in the contract. Records of this interview are 
signed by both attendees and are archived in the staff member’s contract folder .  
An interview with the HR manager always takes place at the end of the colla boration .  
An interview with a psychologist is however only granted at the request of the person concerned . 
 
3. 
Confidentiality  
 
Indicators  
 Data and information regarding personal communication is treated as confidential . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
Anything regarding personal consultation  or communication is treated confidentially and solely by 
the staff member concerned, as specified in the collaboration contract. Cesvi treats all information 
in its possession in a confidential manner, in accordance with regulation UE 2016/679 (GDPR).  
 
 
Principle  Five: Selection and start of collaboration  
Statement: Our personnel management policies and practices aim to attract and 
select the greatest number of candidates with the profiles, skills and competences 
best suited to meet our needs.    
Our selection process and collaboration methods require us to inform candidates about the nature 
of our organization. Staff selection methods and the way a collaboration begins have a major 
influence  on the degree of effectiveness with which our objectives are  met.  
 
 
 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES  
 
1. 
Cesvi discloses and implements its selection policy and procedures in order to guarantee the 
collaboration of individuals able to supply the greatest professional contribution possible, with 
respect to the organization’s Mission . 
 
Indicators  
 Formal policies and procedures outline the key selection and collaboration methods of staff in 
our organization.     
 Recruiting methods aim to attract the largest number of candidates possessing the necessary 
qualifications for specific positions . Wherever possible, Cesvi aims for continuity with 
collaborators who have already been trained.  
 The selection methods are aim ed at identifying, in a fair and functional way, the most suitable 
collaborators who can meet the needs of the Organization in terms of their skills and abilities.  
 11  Implementation procedures and tools  
Staff selection and collaboration procedures are formal ized in the « Selection and start of 
collaboration » section.   
The consolidated practices summarized in this document are also guidelines for the recruitment of 
interns and volunteers possessing university masters’ degrees and civil service volunteers . 
 
2. 
Our policies are based on standards of fairness, consistency and practicality.   
 
Indicators  
Our selection process is fair, transparent and consistent.  
The Foundation selects and hires its employees and collaborators based on the correlation between 
their professional profiles and the needs and requirements of the Foundation, with respect to the 
equal opportunities of all those concerned and in accordance with the Code of Ethics.  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
The «Recruitment  and Selection  Procedure s» (Annex  A) clearly  explains  Cesvi ’s commitment to a 
fair and transparent selection process . 
Please note that all interested parties  (including current and former Cesvi collaborators ) are 
required to apply through the official channels of the Organization ’s website  in order to be 
considered for the selection process. Cesvi’s objective is to try to give precedence to collaborators 
who are already known to the company and have been trained . 
Feedback is given to all candidates wh o reach at least the first stage of selection (interview with an 
HR manager).  
 
3. 
Our procedure s are monitored in order to guarantee fairness and raise effectiveness  levels . 
 
Indicators  
 Cesvi preserves  adequate documentation  and offers candidates feedback regarding the selection 
outcome .  
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
The HR manager  keeps an archive of all open positions , applications received and research results.   
Detailed feedback on the result of the selection is only given to candid ates who were received for 
interview . 
 
 
4. 
The start of a collaboration is based on essential and transparent  procedures . 
 
Indicato rs. 
 The new member of staff is informed in advance of the formal steps necessary to start the 
collaborati on. 
 
Implementation procedures and tools .  
Please see the «Recruitment  and Selection  Procedure s» for operational details .  
 
 12  Principle  Six: Learning , training and development   
“If you think training costs too much, where does that leave ignorance …?” People  in Aid  
Statement: Learning , training and  staff development  are promoted throughout the 
entire  organization . 
We recognize the importance of supporting staff through acqui ring, reinforcing and employing  the 
personal, technical and managerial skills they need to effectively carry out their jobs. We therefore 
propose and direct our staff towards appropriate opportunities for training, development and 
learning, both professionally and personally. Our aim is to insti ll a culture of continuous learning 
in the organization, so that members of staff and the company can develop together . 
 
 
 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES  
 
1. 
Collaborators are sufficiently  prepared and  can develop  their  own professional skill sets . 
 
Indicators  
 Every member of staff receives an adequate  induction program and precise instructions 
concerning their role within the company . 
 Internal training appropriate to their role is offered within the organization . 
 Training and development are linked to external training qualifications, where relevant . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
Head Office staff, expatriates, interns and local employees  receive useful information regarding the 
activities pertaining to their role. Interns and volunteers are always accompanied  by a manager . 
Staff participate in various training sessions held at the headquarters regarding the NGO’s  
organizational  and operation al tools . 
Training and updates on any new procedures/regulations/practices adopted by Cesvi is included in 
the annual program for Head Of fice staff . Ad hoc training is provided for Civil Service volunteers . 
Training is organized for expatriate staff departing on a mission. All pre -departure trainees are 
given specific training material , in addition to related soft copies . Staff already base d abroad 
receive update and appropriate training from personnel  on the mission . Further specific training 
opportunities may be provided for in the annual planning,  budget permitting . 
At the start of the mission , each collaborator will receive suitable trai ning for the tasks and roles to 
be covered . 
As a rule,  the traine rs are extremely competent Cesvi collabora tors in the different fields they 
cover.  The staff can consult the contact person or manager of other specific functi ons at Head 
Office at any given time for any clarification needed. When ever possible, training in special 
technic al subjects will be carried out by expert external trainers . 
After due as sessment  by the department  managers , staff  participation in conferences a nd training 
courses organized by third parties is encouraged.  
  13  2. 
Training and personal growth are encouraged . 
 
Indicators  
 Cesvi encourages personal growth in the staff and for them to take an interest in issues not 
strictly related to their own area of professional expertise . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
Training sessions are set up  concerning  issues  different to those related to the Organization’s 
operations and closer to the staff’s cultural and personal interests.   
Staff may participate in seminars and meetings on various subjects that are organized at the Head 
Office.   
 
3. 
Cesvi promotes the professional and personal training of young people by involving them directly 
in its operations.   
 
Indicators  
 Cesvi organizes a number of internships and opportunities for volunteer work every year, both 
in the Head Office and abroad.  
 Cesvi participates in the national and international Voluntary Civil Service . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
There is a list of cu rrent collaborations with Universities, Master Degrees, Research Centers, Civil  
Service management bodies, etc .  
In addition to accumulating skills while training on the job  accompanied by a  tutor o r local project 
operator , interns and volunteers also part icipate in some of the training sessions provided for the 
rest of the staff.  
 
4. 
Collaborators  share  the information  acquired during  external training . 
 
Indicators  
 Participation in external training sessions is  communicated to staff based at the same workplace . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
The material gathered during the external training sessions is made available to the staff, who will 
in turn be trained wherever possible by the colleagues who participated in the courses.  
The theses and final dissertations written by interns and volunteers  are available for consultation . 
Expatriate  staff regularly receive useful update  material . 
 
5. 
Key training sessions are programmed annually by Cesvi.  
 
Indicators  
 The Organization  has adopted systems to identify training needs , based on the evaluation of staff 
performance.  
 There is an annual outline  plan and related budget . 
  14  Implementation procedures and tools  
The HR manager consults with the heads of Department , then prepares the ann ual plan and relevant 
budget.  
Wherever possible, the drafted plan includes ideas and suggestions from the  staff.  
 
6. 
Cesvi m onitors and verifies the effectiveness of the training . 
 
Indicators  
 Certain tools are used for checking effectiveness . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
An archive is kept of all training sessions effected by Cesvi o r third parties . 
“Pre-departure” trainees participating in compulsory training fill in a course assessment sheet . 
Assessment by the staff participating in external training sessions is gathered in order to identify 
the best external training agencies.  
 
 
Principle  Seven : Health , safety and  security  
Statement: The security, health, well-being  and safety  of our staff are a fundamental 
responsibility of our organization .  
We recognize  that the work of an organization that intervenes in emergency and development 
situations often imposes enormous pressure on its staff , who find themselves operating in complex 
and risky co nditions. It is our responsibility to guarantee the physical and emotional well -being of 
our staff before, during and after completing a mission with Cesvi. The well -being of our operators 
is a vital element of our interventions . Our entire Human Resources  policy revolves around 
ensuring this well -being, a fundamental aspect of which is to guarantee the safety, health and 
security of our members of staff . Our c o-opera tion all around the world in situations of hardship, 
poverty, disease, calamity and conflic t means that we understand how important the relationships 
we establish with the communities where we operate are. Our staff members are the prime 
protagonists in forming these relationships . Safety, security and satisfaction, together with a 
positive work  atmosphere, are key factors for the success of our international human aid co -
operations . Consideration of the potential risks run by our expatriate and local staff forms part of 
the guiding criteria for our assessment of whether or not to open a field of fice in a risky area . 
 
 
 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES  
 
1. 
The policies and  procedure s guarant eeing the health, safety and se curity of staff are known.  
 
Indicators  
 Consistent with the objectives and dimensions of the NGO , Cesvi has adopted tools and 
resources known to its staff,  and for its protection , wherever it operates . 
  15  Implementation procedures and tools  
Our policies  are available for consultation and are comprised of : 
- Security Policy  
- - Health and  Safety Policy (Law 81/2008)  
-  Departing  staff and all field staff ( including local staff) receive  a Security and Safety H andbook  
and basic training appropriate to the country where they are working . 
There are  fire prevention officers, first aid officers and a Health and Safety Representative  (RLS) at 
the Head  Office , who have completed the appropriate courses specified by Law 81/2008 , assisted 
by an external  Health and Safety Manager  (RSPP) . 
 
2. 
Appropriate procedures have been set up for higher risk countries, proportional to their level of 
risk. 
 
Indicators  
 Tools exist that allow us to indicate higher risk countries and methods for tackling the identified 
risks . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
After due consultation of specialized websites, the  Security Advisor  prepares  periodic Security 
Reports  indicating the countries that are most at risk . A specific Country Security Manager  is 
designated for these countries and a specific  Country Security Plan  is drawn up . 
The list of higher risk countries is regularly revised and communicated to the desk offi cers, who 
pass the information on to all staff in the field . 
All on-site members of staff in loco are required to understand and respect the  specific Country 
Security Plan . If necessary , ad hoc  Procedure s and Recommendations  can also be prepared . Cesvi 
collabora tes with the Crisis Unit of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, i n accordance with methods 
agreed  with other NGOs . 
 
3. 
Cesvi protects  its staff members with regard to health, insurance and pension schemes.   
 
Indicators  
 Before starting a collaboration, all expatriate and head office staff undergo a medical check -up 
to verify their suitability for the destined country and assigned duties. Some compulsory 
vaccinations are foreseen . 
 Cesvi fulfils all pension and/or social se curity obligations provided for by law for all 
collaborators, in accordance with the contractual requirements of the country of employment . 
 All employees working in Italy are insured against accident by INAIL . 
 All employees working abroad (regardless of th e type of contract) are insured against accident, 
illness, third -party liability and medical repatriation .  
 All local staff are insured against accident and receive social security and/or pension benefits in 
accordance with national law . 
 
Implementation pr ocedures and tools  
There is a fixed list of compulsory vaccinations.  Before starting a mission, each member of staff 
undergoes a medical examination and, where necessary, receives the list of additional required 
vaccinations from the health advisor.  
The s taff member receives the insurance handbook, information regarding the limits of insurance 
liability and risks covered in the policies at the time of signing the work contract.  16  Intern s and volunteers not insured by the organizations they are working for a re insured by Cesvi.  
Anyone refusing insurance by Cesvi is required to sign a waiver . 
The insurance handbook is available for consultation . 
There is a full list of stipulated insurance policies . 
Every member of staff, volunteer and  intern  is required to undergo a medical visit before work 
commences to verify their suitability for their destination country from a psychological and 
physical point of view and with regard to the duties assigned to them (Law  81/2008).  
An appropriate budget must  be provided for all projects and programs, so that  local staff is insured 
against accident and covered by the pension scheme . 
 
4. 
Adequate  psychophysical recuperation  is guaranteed . 
 
Indicators  
 Employment contracts include rest periods . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
Rest periods are defined by the National Framework Agreement for the regulation of coordinated 
and continuous collaboration as stipulated by the Italian NGO  Association/Link 2007 /Felsa CISL/ 
NIDIL CGIL/UIL Temp, or by other employment agreements in use  (CCNL and local legislation ). 
The collaborator receives a copy of the Framework Agreement (or legislation in force in other 
cases) from the HR manager before signing the employment contract, which defines the number of 
rest periods and ho w these rest periods are to be used, and may ask the HR manager for any further 
clarification . 
Specific R&R ( Rest and Recuperation ) periods  may be envisaged in the event of particularly 
stressful missions . 
Countries where an R&R policy exists are jointly d efined by the  Security Advisor, the head of the 
Project department and the HR department manager , and the implementation procedures ar e 
defined on a case by case basis . 
Rest or holiday periods must be taken during the duration of the work assignment . 
Responsibility for calculating the rest period lies with the collaborator . 
The calendar  used for calculating the rest period is the one in force in the country of employment. 
Local members of staff are subject to local national regulations . 
 
5. 
Members of staff are guaranteed discussion and support during the work assignment and after it 
is completed . 
 
Indicators  
 Specific offices are available for the staff concerning personal or professional matters pertaining 
to safety and security : 
Local staff: contact person indicated  on the  contract; Country Security Manager , where  foreseen ; 
Cesvi Security Advisor ; psychologist . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
The Security Advisor  is available to support staff in dealing with security and safety issues.  
The Security Advisor may be contacted  before , during and  after carrying out a mission . 
A psychologist  is available for the staff members on request: he/she may be contacted before , 
during and  after carrying out a mission .  
 17  6. 
A positiv e and open work  environment  is present  in all places of work . 
 
Indicators  
 Special t imes and opportunities exist for facilitating the creation of a harmonious, open and 
constructive work environment . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
A positive work atmosphere is created by :  
- offering  personal training  opport unities ; 
- creating an informal work atmosphere ; 
- developing everyone’s individual areas of interest and motivation . 
 
 
7. 
Cesvi monitors and checks how its security and staff protection policies are applied.  
 
Indicators  
 Registers of work -related accidents, sicknesses, incidents and deaths are kept and monitored in 
order to help assess and reduce personnel risks in the future . 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
A security incident and accident  database exists which contains information about staff members 
based abroad . 
The accident data base information is kept up to date by the  Security Advisor according to data 
received by the staff.  
For INAIL purposes, s taff members are obliged to communicate the occurrence o f any accident, 
illness or other incident that may seriously affect their work conditions in terms of their security 
and protection within 24 hours to the HR manager . 
There is  a Workers’ Health and Safety Representative  at the head office . 
 
 
8.   
Any action  or conduct  by any member of staff that may be determined an act of harassment  or 
discrimination against colleagues  or external persons will not be tolerated and will be  puni shab le.   
 
 
Indicators  
 Any form of harassment, intimidation or discrimination may lead to disciplinary action as 
provided by the Cesvi Code of Conduct . 
 
 
Implementation procedures and tools  
 
Every member of staff receives a copy of the Policies adopted by the Organization at the start of the 
collaboration (including the Cod e of Conduct ) and is required to endorse and respect  its rules and 
regulations . 
Any incidents related to unacceptable beha vior connected to harassment will be immediately addressed 
and corrective action will be taken, as defined by the Cod e of Condu ct, the HR Policies  and current  
legislation . 18   
 
--- 
 
 
Successive Revisions and  checks . 
This document  and those constituting the Human Resources Policies and P rocedures : the Code of 
conduct , Selection and start of collaboration , Transparent  handling of complaints  and all other  
significant related document s are periodically reviewed and are checked at least  once every  5 years . 
 
Documents  quoted . 
 
The Cesvi Mission, Vision, Values and Principles  in the Annual  & Financial Mission Report  (published 
and certified by an independent company every year since 1990).  
Framework  Agreement  for the regulation of staff  relations , stipulated  by the Italian NGO  Association  
/Link 2007/FELSA CISL/UIL TEMP/ NIDIL CGIL  09/04/2018  
CCNL Trade  – Tertiary  , distribution and  services  
Cesvi Policy:  https://www.cesvi.org/chi -siamo/trasparenza/le -nostre -policy/   
Cesvi Cod e of Conduct   
Cesvi Ethical Code : https://www.cesvi.org/chi -siamo/trasparenza/  
Cesvi Privacy Policy : https://www.cesvi.org/note -sulla -privacy/cesv i-protegge -i-tuoi-dati/ 
Security Policy and  Security and safety handbook  
Workplace Safety Policy  (Law 81/2008)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  19  2. TRASPARENT MANAGEMENT OF COMPLAINTS   
 
Procedure for handling complaints and resolving grievances  in the area of Human Resources 
manag ement .  
 
Introduction  
Cesvi ’s goal is to allow everyone the possibility of establishing and maintaining a happy working 
relationship with the organization, and it is of primary importance that all members of staff feel they are 
treated in a  fair and  equitable manner . 
It is also true that operational stress caused  by difficulties e ncountered  in the countries where Cesvi 
acts, or even purely the normal relationship problems that can arise in the work situation may often be 
the source of serious  problems if not  promptly addressed and quickly resolved.  
In this kind of situation, it is important that the collaborator has the appropriate opportunities and tools 
to be able to be heard . 
 
 
Cesvi offers opportunities for the exchange of communication and discussion between members of staff 
and managers within the different Human Resources contexts .  
The time slots and opportunities identified for this situation (for example, debriefing , organizing a 
meeting with a manger , etc.) are the best suited for tackling problems and pre -empting any divergences 
of opinion . Should this not be possible for any reason, however, it is advisable to follow the procedure 
indicated below in order to guarantee every individual the possibility of drawing attention to any 
situations of distress, complaint or potential conflict before they become unmanageable, regardless of 
the type of employment contract established with Cesvi.   
 
Furthermore , the objective is to define general procedures in order to resolve any potential dif ferences 
that may arise between members of staff, or between  the staff and managers . 
 
 
Inspiring principles . 
 
Everyone  is important . Whether local employee, expatriate, consultant,  etc., everyone is worthy of 
attention. His or her opinions have a right to be heard . 
 
Everyone  has the right to know who to turn to in order to be heard.  
Every single person has the right to know who to refer to in order to state their opinions, complaints or 
requests.  
 
Everyone  has the right to a reply . 
While precedence will b e given to the most urgent requests, everyone has the right to receive a reply to 
their requests, available resources and operational priorities permitting . Should a reply not be possible, a 
reason must be provided.   
 
Human resources are the solution, not the problem . 
Any problem that is not addressed may get worse.  Sharing problems , and suggesting strategies to tackle 
them , leads to identifying solutions more rapidly and result in everyone becoming stronger . 
  20   
1. Precedence given to internal grievance procedures . 
Anyone with a claim or  grievance , or who feels he/she has been damaged during the course of their 
relationship or professional service with Cesvi, is strongly advised to find a way of resolving the 
conflict  as quickly as possible  in the followi ng recommendations , before resorting to the procedures 
indicated in their employment Contract or specified in the National Framework  Agreement or provided 
for in accordance with the civil Legislation of their Country of work.  
 
2. Who to contact in the case of compl aints or requests . 
Cesvi s taff in the field  and staff working at the head office : the contact person for every Cesvi employee 
is clearly indicated in every employment contract. This is the person charged with receiving complaints, 
claims and reques ts. 
If it is not possible to interact with this contact person for any reason (e.g. in the event that the problem 
has arisen in the relationship with the same contact ), the head office Heads of Department may be 
contacted , and he/she  will manage the proble m with the support of the HR office  when needed . Where 
this may not be possible, the Human Resources department should be approached directly and they will, 
if deemed necessary, involve the COO and CEO. In these cases, only written requests  forwarded in 
Italian , English, French or Spanish will be taken into consideration .  
 
3. Procedures for resolving  disputes and handling complaints . 
Verbal requests will be answered verbally, written requests will receive written replies . 
The person charged with evaluating the report by the person concerned will proceed carefully and 
discre etly, but may also hear out the interested parties in an informal manner if appropriate . 
Before any decision is taken, he/she will pursue all reasonable routes available at that time in order to 
resolve the conflict or satisfy the claim . 
If significant actions result from this decision, for example; a modification of the employment contract 
or the interruption of a project, the interested parties have the right to be consulted again (including by 
telephone, email , etc.), before the decision is formalized . 
Furthermore , in such cases, the CEO’s approval is required before proceeding with the formal decision.  
 
4. Revision  of these  procedur es. 
Cesvi considers all Human Resources’ procedures to be vital to the success of its  development 
cooperation  and humanitarian aid ; its operations that can only be effective and efficient with everyone’s 
contribution . Any suggestions regarding these procedures should be addressed  to: recruiting@cesvi.org .  
The procedures are subject to periodic review as part of the revision process of the entirety of the 
Human Resources’ policies and procedures.   
 
5. Non-application . 
These  procedures do n ot apply to relationships with clients and suppliers, whose specific  contracts 
should be applied to . 
 
 
 
 
  21  3. SELECTION  AND  START OF COLLABORATION  
 
 
Recru itment  & Select ion  
 
General principles   
Statement: Our personnel management policies and practices aim to attract and select the 
greatest number of candidates with the profiles, skills and competences best suited to meet our 
needs . 
 
Cesvi’s process  of Recruitment & Selection  (R&S), which presents  our organization and the way we 
select our staff to candidates , significantly influences the effectiveness with which they will pursue our  
objectives .  
 
1. The policies  and procedure s expressed  in this document define  the selection criteri a and 
methods used for beginning a collaboration with the Organization . 
2. The selection process aims to be effective, fair and transparent.   
3. In accordance with the Organization’s Ethical Code, and based on the principles  of correctness  
expressed within  it, the selection p rocess has been creat ed to avoid any unauthorized 
discrimination  based on age,  gender , sexual orientation , health , race, nationality , political 
opinions and religious convictions . 
4. The Organization  selects and recruits collaborators based on them corresponding to their 
professional profiles and the needs a nd requirements of the Organization , while nevertheless  
respecting  the equal opportunities  of all interested parties , avoiding  unlawful  favoritism  and any 
form of cronyism . 
5. The objective is to ensure that the people collaborating with Cesvi are able to off er the best 
professional contribution possible, in accordance with the Organization ’s mission . 
6. Staff will be selected according to their skills and merits, consistent with the requirements of the 
position they will occupy . 
7. Our recruiting  methods aim to involve the greatest number of candidates who possess the 
necessary professional prerequisites . The selection methods and tools are compatible with the 
economic and human resources available . 
8. Cesvi favors candidates who have already worked or are currently  working with the 
Organization .  In this way, we aim to foster continuity with existing employees and reward the 
loyalty of those who have provided professional services consistent with the standards required 
by Cesvi and donors . 
9. Feedback about the outcome  of the application is given to those candidates who have been 
interviewed . 
10. Cesvi retains adequate formal documentation  (published job openings , dates  of publication , 
applications  received, et c.) in order to monitor and improve the effectiveness and fairne ss of the 
process. The documentation is confidential and preserved in accordance with legislative 
provisions (EU Regulation  n.2016/679 (GDPR) ). 
11. All the Organization’s informative  materials  and advertisement appearing in the various 
channels shall highlight the NGO’s commitment against all forms of discrimination . 
 
Please refer to Annex A  (Recruitment and Selection Procedures ) of this  Policy for all aspects relating to 
the operational  steps o f the selection process . 
 22   
Second Part : External Codes to which  Cesvi ad heres . 
 
1. People in Aid  code and Core Humanitarian Standard  
 
All organizations  operating in humanitarian aid or cooperation development have learned that having 
proper support and well managed staff is a key factor of success in delivering their mission . Any 
initiative  that results in making employers clearer about their responsibil ities will ultimately help them 
become better managers of people, and therefore better able to provide high quality assistance.  
 
Cesvi has formally adhered to the  “People in Aid  Code of good Practice”  since February 2004, which 
was also the source of insp iration for the first approved version of its 2008 Cesvi Human Resources 
Policy .  
The People In Aid  Code of good Practice lapsed  in 2014 , when it was absorbed by the Core 
Humanitarian Standard (CHS). CHS unites the HAP 2010 Accountability and Quality Manag ement 
Standard s, the People in Aid  Code of good Practice and the SPHERE  Core Standard s section  in one 
single  code, thereby covering all areas of response management and humanitarian aid  – including 
operative , financial , human  resources  etc.4 
 
The CHS is divided into 9  areas of  responsibility  – called  commi tments  – which the humanitarian  
organization  sets out in order to guarantee that humanitarian assistance to the communities in need :  
1. offers adequate and relevant assistance ; 
2. is made available at the tim e of need ; 
3. does not invalidate local capacities , but increases their resilience and skills ; 
4. provides for full and correct  information  and participation ; 
5. provides for safe and easily accessible systems for making  a complaint ; 
6. is complementary  to and well-coordinated with humanitarian bodies ; 
7. is the result of the elaboration and process of improvement undertaken by the humanitarian 
organization ; 
8. is guaranteed by competent  employees and volunteers who are sufficiently well supported ;  
9. uses resources  in an effective, efficient and ethical way . 
 
To date, Cesvi is a member of CHS Alliance and is actively working on implementing the standards set 
by CHS. In 2018, Cesvi completed the internal process of checking the compliance of its own formal 
practices and provisions – Policies, codes , guidelines , etc – with the key actions and organizational 
responsibilities  provided by the  CHS.  
 
With regard to the management of human resources, commitment 8 defines the key actions and 
organizational responsibilities  as follows : 
 
Commitment 8: communities and people affected by crisis receive assistance appropriate and 
relevant to their needs   
Quality Criterion: staff are supported to do their job effectively, and are treated fairly and 
equitably.  
Key actions  Organizational responsibilities  
8.1 Staff work according to the m andate and 
values of the organiz ation and to agreed 
objectives and performance standards ; 8.4 The organiz ation has the management and 
staff capacity and capability to deliver its 
programs ; 
                                                 
4 https://www .chsalliance.org/  23  8.2 Staff adhere to the policies that are relevant 
to them and understand the consequences of not 
adhering to them ; 
8.3. Staff develop and use the necessary 
personal, technical and management 
competencies to fulfil their rol e and understand 
how the organiz ation can support them to do 
this. 8.5 Staff policies and procedures are fair, 
transparent, non -discriminatory and compliant 
with local employment law ; 
8.6 Job descriptions, work objectives and 
feedback processes are in place so that staff 
have a clear un derstanding of what is required 
of them ;  
8.7 A code of conduct is in place that 
establishes, at a minimum, the obligation of 
staff not to exploit, abuse or otherwise 
discriminate against people ; 
8.8 Policies are in place to support staff to 
improve their skills and competencies ; 
8.9 Policies are in place for the security and the 
well-being of staff . 
 
2. Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement an d NGOs  in 
Disaster Relief and the Sphere Project Humanitarian Charter and Mini mum Standards in  Disaster 
Relief . 
 
Humanitarian  aid is a fundamental expressio n of the universal value of solidarity  between people and an 
ethical  imperative . 
 
Those carrying out a humanitarian role nowadays face a number of major challenges. There has been an 
increasing tendency for International Law, including International Humanitarian Law, Human Rights 
and Refugee Rights, to be ignored or blatantly violated . 
 
The "humanitarian  space " that is required to ensure access to vulnerable  population s, and th e safety and 
security of everyone working for humanitarian ends, must be maintained as essential preconditions for 
the delivery of humanitarian aid, and to enable humanitarian entities such as Cesvi to be able to lend 
assistance and  offer protection to pop ulations affected by crisis. The principles of neutrality , 
impartiality , humanity and  indepe ndence  of humanitarian  action, as laid down by International Law 
and in particular International Humanitarian Law, must be respected . 
 
In order to underline its commit ment  to these humanitarian principles, Cesvi adheres  to two 
fundamental international codes : 
The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement an d NGOs  in 
Disaster Relief and the Sphere Project Humanitarian Charter and Min imum Standards in  Disaster 
Relief . 
 
Cesvi promotes the knowledge of these codes among its staff and advocates for the expansion of the 
"humanitarian space " for NGOs and their partners . 
 
The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement an d NGOs  in 
Disaster Relief . 
 
The Cod e was developed and approved by eight of the world’s largest disaster response organizations in 
the summer of  1994 , and represents a major leap forward in setting standards for disaster response . 
 24  The Cod e of Conduct , like most professional codes , is a voluntary one. It is applicable to every NGO, 
whether national or international, large or small .  It lays down the 10 principle guidelines to which 
every NGO should adhere with regard to its disaster response wor k, and goes on to describe the 
relation s that agencies working in disaster response should foster  with donor governments, host 
governments and the United Nations system . 
 
Compliance with the Cod e is the responsibility of every NGO. No single NGO may ever f orce another 
to act in a certain way, and currently no international NGO association for disaster response exists 
which possesses the authority to sanction its own members13. 
 
Core p rinciple s: 
1. The humanitarian imperative comes first .  
2. Aid is given regardless of the race, creed or nationality of the recipients and without adverse 
distinction of any kind. Aid priorities are calculated on the basis of need alone . 
3. Aid will not be used to further a particular political or religious standpoint . 
4. We shall e ndeavour not to act as instruments of government foreign policy . 
5. We shall respect culture and custom . 
6. We shall attempt to build disaster response on local capacities . 
7. Ways sha ll be found to involve program  beneficiaries in the management of relief aid . 
8. Relief aid must strive to reduce future vulnerabilities to disaster as well as meeting basic needs . 
9. We hold ourselves accountable to both those we seek to assist and those from whom we accept 
resources . 
10. In our information, publicity and advertising activit ies, we shall recognize disaster victims as 
dignified human beings, not hopeless objects . 
Website: www.ifrc.org/publicat/conduct/  
 
 
Sphere  
 
The Sphere Project  was launched in 1997 by a group of humanitarian NGOs and the Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Movement. Sphere is based on two fundamental beliefs : firstly , that everything possible 
should be done to alleviate human suffering caused by calamity and conflict, and secondly that those 
affected by disaster are entitled to a dignified existence, and to protection, security and full participation 
in decisions relating to their re -establishment . To this end , the project has developed  several tools, the 
key one being the guidelines, which ar e periodically revised.    
 
Sphere represents a unique voluntary body, whose initiative reflects a collective resolution and 
combines the experience of a wide range of humanitarian bodies . The community of these players 
                                                 
13 The Code Register. The International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent  keeps  a public record of all NGOs who register their commitment to 
the Code. A complete copy of the Code, including a registration form , is published by the Federation and is available upon request. Cesci requested to be 
registered on December 4, 2002, and the application was accepted on March 3, 2003 . 
 25  include national and international n on-governmental organizations, the International Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Movement, United Nations and donor agencies, governments and representatives from the 
affected populations . 
The Sphere Project is based on : 
 
 International Humanitarian Law, Human R ights and Refugee Rights   
 The aforementioned Cod e of Conduct  for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement   
 
 Sphere’s Humanitarian Charter . This Charter sets out for the first time what populations affected 
by disaster have the right to expect in terms of humanitarian assistance. Sphere aim s to improve the 
quality of assistance provided to people affected by disaster and increase the responsibility of the 
humanitarian system in response to disaster . 
 
The Humanitarian  Charter   
The humanitarian  agencies that adopt this Charter aim to achieve predefined levels of service for 
populations affected by calamity or armed conflict,  and to promote and observe fundamental 
humanitarian principles . 
 
The Humanitarian Charter  expresses  the agencies’ commitment to these principles and to the 
achievement of Minimum Standards . This commitment is based on the agencies recognizing their 
ethical obligations , and reflects the rights and duties laid down by international law, for which states 
and other parties have pre -established obligations . 
 
The Charter  addresses the most basic requirements needed to sustain the lives and dignity of those who 
have been afflicted by catastrophe or conflict.  Concurrently , the Minimum Standard s, described in 
detail in the guidelines , aim to quantify the requirements with regard to people’s need for water, 
sanitation, nutrition, food, shelter and medical care . Many converging issues are taken into 
consideration within the guidelines: protection, gender  issues , children, the elderly, disabl ed people, 
HIV and AIDS and the environment. In their entirety , the Humanitarian Charter  and Minimum 
Standards form an operational framework , resulting  in more effective action during the course of 
humanitarian assistance efforts.   
 
Website: www.sphereproject.org  
 
  
Appendix . 
Supervision and monitoring methods . 
 
Checking procedures . 
Cesvi believes it is necessary to carry out periodic checks to ensure that its operations adhere to the 
principles and procedures detailed in the Codes included in this publication.   
The procedure s descri bed above already contain specific built -in monitoring sy stems according to their 
individual characteristics. However, Cesvi conducts additional systematic, timely  checks during the 
course of the year.  
The CEO assigns an Internal Audit at least once a year to verify that Cesvi is in compliance with the 
Codes and  practices, processes, projects and operations carried out, as described in this document . 
Depending on their significance, the results of these checks are presented and discussed internally and 
are summarized, if appropriate, in the Annual Mission Report for all interested parties to consult . 
 26  Attention is always paid to any critical issues that emerge from the relevant operational offices, in order 
to improve the compliance of Cesvi’s  actions to the principles previously mentioned in the Codes as 
illustrated in this document.  
 
 
 
ANNEX  A 
 
 
RECRUITMENT & SELECTION PROCESS  
 
Definition  
The Recru itment  & Selection process is based on the operations and tools used by Cesvi to look for and 
select members of staff to collaborate with the Organization.   
Depending on the type of employee required, t he different operational units of the central head office 
and managers in the field  are involved in the recruitment process , both in the ea rly stage of defining the 
profile and in the final selection of the candidate . 
 
Functions  involved and  objectives  
Recruiting  manager : preside s over and ensures compliance with the process .   
Requestor : instructs the HR department to begin the search for a candidate once authorization has been 
given by the direct line manager, and takes the final decision about the new employee .  
Cesvi experts  (Sectorial)  and external  consultants : take part in inter views as deemed necessary.   
 
 
Aims : 
The aim of the research  is to select personnel for the following  positions . 
- Cesvi Staff (head office and expatriate ) 
- Intern ships  
- Local s taff ( N.B. : please see the section Local staff recruitment procedure for details of the 
methods employed for selecting local -based staff)  
- Exter nal consultants  (short -term missions ) 
 
The process should be conducted in such a way that the objectives expressed in Cesvi’s HR Policies are 
fully met.   
 
Operational c riteri a 
 
In order to guarantee the implementation of its principles, Cesvi observes the following criteri a: 
 
1. All open positions are published on the Organization’s website www.cesvi.org  and remain there 
for the period of time established by the requesting officer or Recruiting manager, and for  no 
less than 7 days . 
2. All open positions are also published on external channels ( websites operating in the same field, 
Linkedin, et c). 
3. Open positions can be published by the HR department on the intranet or shared via internal 
newsletter s or by e mail.  
4. All open positions refer to any qualified candidate; however , it should be noted that Cesvi 
favors the continuity  of continuing existing  collaboration s and rewarding staff loyalty, and will 
therefore have a tendency to extend service with staff already known,  recruited and previously 
trained.  
5. A preliminary selection of candidates will be carri ed out by the Recruiting officer.  27  6. All candidates who pass this first stage will be invited for one or more interviews with one or 
more different recruiting offices, incl uding the Recruiting  manager , Area d esk officer , Head of 
Mission, Country/Regional Manager, Duties manager s and experts  (Sectorial) . The interviewers 
will provide a formal written assessment.   
7. In order for the interviewers to assess the suitability of the professional profile for the open 
position : 
a. each candidate  shall receive a complete Job Description, either by telephone or at a 
personal interview. If the job is to be based abroad, information on the Cesvi mission in 
the country of employment and the act ivities foreseen by the project shall be provided.  
b. the requisites required for the job shall be those actually necessary for the position.  
Should it be impossible to update the job advertisement, any changes shall  be 
communicated during the interview .  
8. Financial retribution shall be calculated in compliance with salary policies and according to : 
 Role  (autonomy  and responsibility )  
 Experience  and skills acquired  
 Available b udget .  
In the case of expatriate staff, the following shall also be taken into consideration : 
 Security risk in the relevant country  
 Conditions  of greater or less hardship in the country where the mission will take 
place .  
9. Interviewing staff shall be trained  in order to ensure compliance with the organization’s R&S 
policies and prevention of any form of discrimination . 
 
It is not  necessary  to open a public recruitment search in the following instances : 
- casual labor ; 
- in the case of the extension of a contract . 
 
 
Activit ies 
Definition  of candidates’ requirements and profiles  
The Recruiting  manager is the reference person who defines staffing requirements . 
Notifications may arise from : 
 unforeseen needs (eg . humanitarian emergencies or resignations ) 
 medium/long term planning needs .  
 
In both cases the ne ed for new openings is assessed . 
 
New job openings   
New  vacancies are formalized and the profile characteristics required are defined . 
Profile details are gathered from information given  by the requesting officer ; the following elements are 
particularly  necessary : 
  Essential  requirements   
  Desirable  requirements   
 Job Description  
 Conditions  regarding  the economic proposal (salary range) and  benefit s 
 Information  about the activities envisaged for the individual and organizational framework  
 Information about Cesvi ’s operations in the country of destination  (expatriate s) 
 Place of work   
 Date of start of collaboration . 
 28  The new job opening becomes official when notified by the Requesting officer . The monitoring of the 
search process begins at this stage . 
The economic pr oposal (salary range) is established by the Recruitment manager and the Requesting 
officer on the basis of the salary grids, taking into account the available budget.  
Any possible justified  “deviations ” from Cesvi’s established salary bands need to have b een authorized 
by the Chief Operations Officer (for expatriate staff) or the Chief  Executive Officer  (for head office 
staff) before any offer is made to the candidate . 
 
Publication  of advertisements  
The Recruiting  Manager  implement s the job search using the following different channels : 
- Publication  on the  Cesvi  website  (www.cesvi.org ), on the  “ Work with Us ” page .  
- Publication in the most suitable national and international job search channels, according to the 
require d profile  
- Contact s with University  placement  departments  with whom we have  agreements or where we 
have contacts with the teaching staff  
- Dispatch  of a Job Alert  newsletter with updates of new available job searches .  
 
All open positions are published on the Organization’s website to guarantee transparency and equal 
opportunities’ criteria have been met . 
 
Feedback is given to all candidates  who reach at least the first stage of selection (interview with an HR 
manager) . “Generic ”5 candidates are invited to send in their applications for specific positions and to 
sign up to receive the “Job Alert” newsletter . 
 
 
CV screening  
CV screening is carried out by the Recruiting manager, who will assess the coherence of the CV with 
the defined job search profile . A short list (usually 3 -5 candidates) will then be chosen for a second 
screening to be conducted with the Requesting officer .  
 
 
Assessment of application and initial contact  
The Recruiting  manager will make telephone contact with the persons selected for the  previous shortlist 
with the objective of verifying serious interest in the job, clarify ing aspects of his/her CV and set ting a 
date for the interview.   
 
Management of the interviews   
The Recruiting  manager plans the interview times with the shortlisted ca ndidates . Technical, linguistic 
and psycho -attitudinal tests may be used at this stage in order to gain further elements for assessment 
purposes . 
 
Consistency with the desired profile is checked d uring  the interview  and previous work experiences are 
examined, as well as an understanding of the person, his/her motivation and technical aspects of the 
collaboration . 
 
The interview ends with a presentation of the indicative time frame of the entire selection process, the  
start date of the collaboration and training . 
                                                 
5“Specific” candidates are those who apply for a specific position; “generic” refers to spontaneous and unsolicited 
applications.    
 29  The candidate s whose interview with the recruiting manager has been positive will then continue in the 
selection process. One or several steps are then organized (according to the job function) with the 
differ ent people involved in the procedure (principally with the direct line manager ). 
Depending on the technical skills and significance of the sought -after employee, other in -depth 
interviews, technical tests or involvement with technical experts may be envisa ged for the recruitment.   
 
Those involved in the recruitment shall provide a formal written assessment at the end of the interview, 
stating the candidate’s consistency with the desired profile and coherence with the Organization 
Mission’s profile .  
 
The Recruiting manager checks the references provided . 
 
Candidates who are not successful  beyond  the first phase of the selection process shall receive feedback 
from the HR manager, usually via email.  
 
Selection of the  candidate  
The responsibility for making the final  decision  on the choice of candidate  lies with  the Requestor , after 
consultation with the Recruiting manager . The decision  is formalized when the reasons for the choice 
are reported on the Interview Assessment File.  
The selection criteria shall t ake the following factors into consideration:   
- consistency with the required profile   
- outcome of the various interviews and tests undergone .  
 
The salary offer,  estimated date of the start of the collaboration and training is communicated at the 
same time as the confirmation of the choice of candidate. Any final negotiations regarding the economic 
proposal is conducted directly with the candidate  and the Recruiti ng manager , in coordina tion with the 
Requesting officer . 
Whenever  possible , the job offer is made orally; where this is not possible the candidate shall be sent  an 
email  containing the details of the proposal . Once the oral offer has been made to the candi date, the 
Recruiting manager shall formalize the proposal, by sending all the written documentation including the 
draft of the job contract , the Framework Agreement /CCNL regulating the collaboration  and the Cesvi 
policies  in order to guarantee that the process can be  tracked  consistently and in a formal manner.  
 
 
Internal  candidates  shall initially be informed of the results of the selection  orally  (if possib le). 
Following this verbal communication, he/she shall receive a written confirmation of the outcome of the 
selection .  
 
 
Training & Briefing  Planning  
Once the offer has been accepted, the Recruiting manager and the Requesting officer  shall define the 
Training and  Briefing program at the start of the collaboration . 
 
 
Closure and  reporting  of the  filled position  
The Recruiting manager declares the  vacancy  filled and retains a synthetic report of the statistics 
concerning the selection. Once the opening position has been filled , he/she shall archive the candidate s’ 
documentation (including the  CV or staff files), in accordance with the legislation of the treatment of 
personal data  (EU Regulation  n.2016/679 (GDPR)) . 
 30   
Selection of  intern s and  volunteers  
A simplified procedure along the lines of the one  described  above is carried out for interns and 
volunteers ; in particular , the candidates are  interviewed,  and feedback is given to everyone at the 
outcome of the  selection . 
The same applies for Civil Service volunteers , who are treated as regulations established by  the 
National Civil Service Office, in agreement with the  Mosaico Association  managing authority . 
 
Besides the relationships cemented with  certain  Master ’s degree courses , contacts are also sought with 
new Master’s and Specialist Schools.  
 
Start of the  collaboration  
The new  collaborator  is informed  in advance of the formal steps necessary for the start of the 
collaboration. The Recruiting manager receives the completed personal data inf ormation from the  
collaborator , who is then informed about the proces sing of his/her personal data and receives a draft JD 
and contrac t, together with a copy of the regulatory Framework Agreement (or CCNL for head office 
employees) . 
The Requestor  completes the contractual form and forwards it to the HR Offic er, who then fol lows the 
entire contract -signing process (which may also take place by electronic mail if necessary) and who 
communicates the official start of the collaboration to the necessary bodies.  
 
Medica l check -up 
Before commencing work, the  collaborator  needs to undergo a medical examination by a registered 
health advisor (Consolida ted Safety Act  81/08,) in order  to ascertain his/her psychophysical fitness for 
the duties to be carried out in the country of service . Compulsory vaccinations and blood tests are 
foreseen for collaborator s working in developing countries and for head office staff whose activities 
include working on missions abroad .  
 
Training   
Participation  in “pre-departure ” training is obligatory . If it cannot be carried out for whatever reason, it 
should be completed at the first possible opportunity , even by availing oneself of e-learning  tools .  
Pre-departure training illustrates the vision, mission and values of the organization , the program’s  
objectives , and its Policies  and principal  codes , as well as demonstrating the expected behavior  
standard s of every member  of staff. Every key policy and procedure characterizing the  organization  is 
manifested  during  this training course . 
 
Other  activities . 
The Recruiting  manager  also conducts informative and fact -finding interviews with potential 
candidates , which are recorded as per the methods described above.   
 
The Recruiting  manager  is in  regular  contact  with other bodies  (Civil Service Bodies, Non -profit  
Organizations , NGOs , Universities , CHS Alliance, Alliance 2015 ) with whom he/she shares policies,  
procedure s and operational  methods . 
 
 
Local staff selection p rocedure   
 
Over  80% of staff working  with Cesvi are human resources engaged directly in the Countries where 
Cesvi operates . The different countries are characterized by vastly different legislative regulations in the 
workplace . It was therefore considered useful to establish the minimum standards that each mission 31  must observe, in order to guarantee equality of treatment and opport unities for all Cesvi collaborators 
throughout the world. This also facilitates staff mobi lity from one mission to another, which is an 
important  factor  in personal and professional growth.  
 
Recruitment methods are aimed at attracting the greatest number of candidates possessing the necessary 
qualifications for specific positions . 
Cesvi  always aims to favor continuity with collaborators who have already been trained . 
 
Each and every  job search  for a collaborator  involves a public recruitment announcement6 being made, 
even if  Cesvi aims to favor continuity with existing and former  collaborator s. 
Each job opening shall  briefly indicate the essential and desirable requirements,  a JD, the organization al 
framework , the place of work and the date of the start of the collaboration . 
A written evaluation of the final decision shall remain in the archives, together with a copy  of the 
selected person’s CV.  
It is highly recommended that an archive be kept of all job p ositions sought  after.   
 
 
Exception s to the selection procedure regarding external consultants   
 
In the specific case of a search for consultants with technical expertise and a high degree of professional 
specialization, it may be necessa ry to select such persons through “direct ” means . 
In these exceptional  cases, the following procedure is to be foreseen:  
  
1. The Requesting officer sends a request for a waiver to the standard procedures to the  Managing 
Director  and the  HR Manager for their approval ; 
2. The Requesting officer send s a written, formal letter explaining the reason for the request to waive 
the standard procedure . 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
6 Public recruitment advertising can appear in the form of: a poster displayed on a local office notice board (minimum 
requirement), advertising in the local press (best means of publicity), use of local websites. The type of publicity chosen 
should match the position sought after : depending on the urgency , cost s and importance of the profile, the search should be 
as widesprea d as possible . In any case, any relevant decisions should be made by the  Country/Regional Manager or HoM 
and HR manager in the country, whenever they are present . 
 